INTRODUCTION

Villette has an interest of its own apart from its place in literature. It is the great battle-ground of Charlotte Brontë's biographers, of those who have accused her of plagiarising, more or less grossly, from her own experience, and those who are bent on defending her from this charge.

There is, of course, no reason why she should not have plagiarised from her own experience or anybody else's. The question is: Did she? It seems to me that there is not one scrap of evidence to prove that she did. None not even a fifth-hand rumour—to support the preposterous legends that have gathered round her name on the strength of this one book.

It may at once be conceded that Villette is unmistakably the novel of reality. It is the one Brontë book that has most rewarded the lover of identifications. There is hardly a character in it whose prototype had not been discovered by the Brontë specialist. Dr. Bretton is Mr. George Smith, Mrs. Bretton is Mr. George Smith's mother, Madame Beck is Madame Héger, and M. Paul Emanuel is M. Héger. More than any of the Brontë novels it bears the mark, not only of experience, but of intense personal experience. Therefore, out of the materials found in Villette the specialist has built up the Romance of Charlotte Brontë, in other words, that actual love-story which is supposed to be the base and root of all novels written by women. Tout talent de femme est un bonheur manqué.

Emily Brontë escaped this imputation because her genius was admittedly “of imagination all compact,” while in Char- lotte that power was coupled with a spirit of observation almost cruelly exact. In her first novel, The Professor, the lower talent is predominant. In Jane Eyre imagination riots almost to the dethronement of the lesser power. In Shirley there is a sharp struggle for ascendancy between the two, causing Titanic upheavals and subsidences. The book shows a larger vision of reality and a slenderer grasp of it. But in all the great scenes, the great passages, of Villette, imagination 
