6
The flax straw comes into the first-named building at the far end from the
retting tank, and is there weighed, examined, and sorted, if necessary.
Later on when the factory is extended a rope carrier will convey across
the road the flax which has come by rail.
An ingenious apparatus is used to make the sheaves.
Each sheaf is made up of four beats placed top and root about, so as to form
approximately cylindrical sheaves. The four bands are of manila, with a big
knot at one end and a loop at the other, and are used for each of the beats in the
Subsequent operations. The sheaves weigh 15 to 18 pounds.
They are placed vertically in the crates, which hold about 150 sheaves or
say 2,200 to 2,800 pounds of rippled straw.
The crates are wooden cages 16 feet long, 4 feet 4 inches high and 8 feet
9 inches broad; the top and one side are hinged.
When filled the crates are lowered into the tank by a travelling crane.
This requires to be powerful to handle these crates weighing 1, 2, or 6 tons
according as they are empty or filled with dry or wet flax straw.
~
Fig. 1–A crate turned over
About 3,300 gallons of water per day is needed for the tank. This water
is heated to from 86° to 96° by coils through which the condensed steam passes.
It is discharged through pipes into the bottom of the tank and made to mix
thoroughly with the water so that at 10 feet from the inlet the whole mass is
maintained at a steady temperature of 72°.
The water flows gently through the crates, and the various heavy gums
resulting from the retting trickle down the flax stalks to the bottom of the tank,
whence they are carried off by the slow flow of the outlet in the bottom of the
tank.
There are seven crates in the tank, and during the retting they are immersed
first at the outlet end and then taken out, turned over, and advanced one place
each time till they arrive at the seventh position, 10 feet from the water inlet.
The crates are moved slowly so as not to stir up the water and interfere
with the work of the bacteria. This slow movement allows of a drip from the
flax stalks, drawing thus into their midst a supply of oxygen, destructive to the

