. 5
In the spinning the fibre was perfectly normal, and was considered equal
to good flax from that country.
The bleaching was done by Mr. George Ovigneur at Halluin. The results
obtained in boiling, creaming, quarter-, half-, and three-quarter white, full white
and extra white would place the yarn spun as among the best.
These various trials, in consideration of the quantity experimented on and
the checking of the results, might have been considered as a conclusive industrial
trial. Mr. Feuillette preferred proving still further the value of his system;
with the help of Mr. Ligneaux, and the financial aid of a few friends, he put
down a demonstration plant.
Goderville is a little town, the chief town of the Canton of Caux (Nor-
mandy, France). Flax is largely grown there, seeing that 2,500 acres a year
are given over to this crop. Every year about the end of June the Belgian
dealers visit the district, and there, as elsewhere, they buy “on foot” the best
fields they find. When the flax is pulled, if the crop comes up to their expecta-
tion, they fulfil their contract, but if storm or hail or any other cause has
damaged the chances of a profit, many of them choose to ignore the contract
they have made, and leave on the grower's hands the flax he thought he had sold.
Classed as second quality, this flax straw will be difficult to sell, even below
cost; even first quality flax straw is diminished in value by the amount of the
freight to the river Lys. -
The establishment of an industrial retting plant in the Department of
Seine-Inférieure (in which Goderville is situated) was bound to impart a healthy
tone to the flax straw business, and ensure for the growers a better return for
their products. These considerations, emphasized by the gratitude of the
inventor to the “Société Centrale d’Agriculture de Seine-Inférieure”, made
him decide to place his demonstration plant in Goderville. -
From the very first this had a great influence on the acreage under flax
in the Caux region, as the official Journal of 14th June, 1913, gives an acreage
of 17,500 acres for Seine-Inférieure, a figure never hitherto reached. For this
“Department” the figures are as follows:–
1908. . . . . . . . . . . . . 13,195 acres. 1911 . . . . . . . . . . . . 10,375 acres.
1909. . . . . . . . . . . . . 9,055 “ 1912. . . . . . . . . . . . 12,500 “
1910. . . . . . . . . . . . . 9,452 “ 1913. . . . . . . . . . . . 17,500 “
In the last quarter of 1912, the establishment got started, after what seemed
long delays to those who were longing to see their hopes take concrete form.
A detailed account of the special machinery for this new industry, which
had to be specially designed, will enable you to understand why this factory
which was to have been started in March, 1912, was not set going till six months
later.
The three buildings of the factory, on a piece of ground large enough for
subsequent enlargement, are separated from the railway by a road.
The construction of these three sheds is very simple.
The largest measures 160 by 26 feet. It is used for the rippling, putting
into sheaves, the retting tank and the hydro-extractor. :
The second building of about the same size contains the drying machine
and the breaking and scutching. - -
The third and smallest building contains the power-house, the office, and
the caretaker's house. -
The power is derived from a semi portable steam engine of 15 horse-power,
sufficient to furnish the electrical power for lighting and driving and the steam.
for heating and drying. - . . . .
An ingenious arrangement is that whereby the exhaust steam is used first
in the drying machine and then to heat the retting tank. A water tank fed by
a ball cock from the town supply completes the fixtures.
