7
bacteria not requiring air, but favourable to those that do, and that perform
the retting. The trickle of the water along the stems ensures the regular distri-
bution of the bacteria, and an even spreading of the gums along the stalks.
Though the crates weigh up to 6 tons, they are easily handled. The
engineer, or man in charge of the retting on the travelling crane, has at his hand
the switches of three electric motors, controlling respectively the backward or
forward movement of the crane, the raising and lowering of the crates or their
turning. A pointer on the crane and marks on the wall indicate the exact
spot where the crane must stop to raise or lower the crate.
The different operations are performed by an endless chain on two shafts,
working pawls, at one time raising the crate and at another lowering it;
an ingenious arrangement anchors the crates below the surface, doing away
with the loading of the crates, as is usually done in water-retting.
A cock at the end of the tank regulates the required flow, and also allows
of the emptying of the tank to do away with what old time retters called the
“fatigue of the rettery”, in other words the too great concentration of bacteria.
This cock allows the operator to regulate the temperature of the whole
tank. The choice of the right temperature, and its diffusion throughout the
whole mass of the water are conditions essential to the success of industrial
retting.
There is more than one species of bacteria requiring oxygen that facilitate
the separation of the fibre from the woody part of the plant. There are a great
number of them, but all do not act at the same temperature, or in the same
length of time, and it is well to favour the development of none but those whose
action allows one to attain the desired end.
At Goderville the retting is done in six days. It could no doubt be quick-
ened, but at the risk of losing much more in regularity and uniformity of the
product than would be gained by the saving of time.
When the retting is complete the crate is removed from the tank at its
inlet end, and the flax taken out. The sheaves are then untied and one band
placed around each beat to facilitate the handling, and these are put into the
hydro-extractor.
This machine consists of a large metallic wheel of 11 feet 6 inches diameter,
revolving in a horizontal plane, and containing twenty-eight sections disposed
radially. In each of these sections five beats are placed, roots outwards.
When the hydro-extractor is filled, it is started slowly to allow of a proper
washing. A measured tank sprinkles water evenly on the flax, and when the
tank is emptied it fills automatically. As soon as the washing is finished the
speed is increased up to 150 revolutions per minute, and the centrifugal force
removes the excess of water. It takes about 15 minutes to wash the flax and
extract the water.
The straw thus freed of a portion of its water is taken on trucks to the
second building to be dried. The drying machine consists of a sort of tunnel
composed of a series of twelve wagons placed end to end, to a length of 82 feet.
These trucks move up endways of the drying machine from the end to the
beginning and sideways at each end for the filling and emptying.
Each wagon holds eight to ten sheaves of straw. The stalks are placed
end ways and slanting from the horizontal on cross rods so as to take full advant-
age of the hot air current flowing through the tunnel. This current is produced
by a powerful blowing fan.
The air heated by a coil through which flows the exhaust steam, enters
at a temperature of 95° and leaves at a temperature of 61° to 64°. The newly
filled wagon is placed at the end where the air outlet is and in turn every hour the
wagons are advanced one step towards the fan. In this way the drying is done
regularly, the flax coming into the higher temperatures only after being gradually
‘reed from the moisture which penetrated it.
