8
The dried flax taken from the wagon is carried by a conveyor to the breaking
and scutching machine.
Scutching as carried out in Courtrai, for example, consists of three opera-
tions:—
(1) Breaking, to break up the woody matter into short lengths.
(2) Scutching, to separate the woody matter from the fibre.
(3) Dressing, to straighten out the fibres.
Mr. Feuillette's scutcher performs these three operations at once.
The flax straw coming from the drying machine is caught lengthways,
being held by guiding rollers, and is acted upon by a number of fluted stamps.
The broken shive is drawn away by a fan, and the fibre does not suffer owing
to the exact engagement of the flutes. The straw having been fed in parallel,
comes out clean and straight.
Fig. 2–The hydro-extractor
The various processes which we have considered yield a product with a
characteristic smell and colour. Every type of retting has its characteristic
smell, and each retting centre produces fibre of a distinctive colour.
At Hines, for instance, the flax after retting is spread flat on the grass in
the sun; this is called bleaching. At the Lys, the more sun there is, the
brighter the flax is. Here at Goderville the drying is done in the dark, in hot
air. The chlorophyll is not destroyed by the sunlight, and the fibre remains
greyish-green. This is of no great importance now when chlorine, properly
handled, gives a uniform whiteness to fibre from any source.
Spinners in the first rank, such as the York Street Flax Spinning Co., Ltd.,
of Belfast, Louis Nicolle & Van de Wëghe in Lille, spun this flax and the yarns
made good cloth, which bleached well.
Gentlemen, in this brief account I have given you of the industrial technique
of the Feuillette retting, I have tried to point out the ingenious characteristics of
the system, but I regret that I should be incapable of expressing to you the
sense of satisfaction which visitors to Goderville feel in seeing this hitherto
insoluble problem solved in such a clever way.


